i hope you guys enjoyed this episode
brought to you by our sponsors
at athletic greens to receive a free
one-year supply of vitamin d and five
free travel packs with your first
purchase visit athleticgreens.com
impact theory enjoy the episode
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am joined
today by somebody that i've been waiting
30 plus years to speak to the
legendary astronomer alex filippanko
alex thank you so much for joining me
well tom it's my pleasure and my honor
you know you've done so much to impact
people's lives
in a positive way you know i've watched
a number of your programs it's just been
fantastic
and you and i share a number of aspects
of our lives
in the for example we like to set goals
we like to be efficient
work hard be motivated know why it is
we're
motivated and so what you say to people
resonates very much with what i've
you know how i've conducted my life and
how i try to inspire people as well
wow man thank you for somebody who was
on
one of the teams i think there were 50
of you that essentially won the nobel
prize i know it can only go to three
people
um but that you were on that team that's
incredible man thank you you obviously
have
very useful goals so
very excited to to sit down and have
this chat and hopefully the next time we
do it we'll be in person
that would be amazing yeah i mean you
know weird circumstances but
i know that in the past year you've had
a lot of practice
doing these um you know skype interviews
with people and they worked out really
well it
it's almost as though i'm there with you
in person
yeah it is uh the technology is a saving
grace and when i think about
the fact that this wouldn't have been
possible if this had happened back in
you know 2010 like this wouldn't have
been
possible so i know there are a lot of
times when this could have
occurred and been just disastrous
even more so than it's been now so uh
for that i will i will certainly tip my
hat in gratitude so
uh yeah technology has brought us
together and here's something in fact
that a lot of people
may not understand about astronomy and i
was saying before we started rolling
that one of the things that um
i was once asked what i would be if i
wasn't an entrepreneur and i said an
astronomer and
admittedly that um is is accurate in
terms of how astronomy makes me feel i'm
way too bad at math to actually do it
um but there's something about the
the grandeur but the way that it's
usable and when i heard that
um the theory of relativity was
necessary for gps to work
that's when i was like wow there's a lot
of things that we have around us that we
take for granted that actually have to
do with physics and people looking up at
the stars
and i wanted to start with what you
teach in your basics of astronomy class
you say there's like four or five things
that you want people to learn
and if they don't learn you're going to
come back and fail them you know even if
it's 20 years deep in their career
what are what are those handful of
things yeah you know
one of them is that as carl sagan used
to say we are made of star stuff
and by that what he meant was that
the heavy elements in your body the
carbon in your cells the oxygen that you
breathe and that's in water
the calcium in your bones the iron in
your red blood cells the phosphorus in
your dna
all those heavy elements were cooked up
through nuclear reactions deep inside
stars
during the course of their normal
evolution and also when they explode
some stars explode
and this debris goes flying out and
mixes with other clouds of gas
gravitationally collapses forms new
stars they
then go through the same process of what
we call nucleosynthesis and then stellar
explosion etc etc
and after billions of years of evolution
our galaxy the milky way galaxy had
these clouds of gas that had a
sufficient quantity
of heavy elements that rocky earth-like
planets could form
and then somehow somewhere you know
bacteria formed little
singular cell organisms formed and
through billions of years of evolution
here we are
sentient beings that can come to
understand
the process of our origins the origins
of the very elements of which we are
made
if that doesn't grab you i don't know
what will
right that we're made out of atoms
that were literally spat out of
exploding stars
yeah that one's interesting to me for a
couple reasons one it gives you a sense
of
um this sort of star wars moment of a
long time ago in a galaxy far far away
that there were that we've sort of come
along so late
that stars formed and collapsed and
exploded populated you know other places
and then we ultimately come out of that
it really gave me a sense of like what
13 billion years really is
uh an extraordinary amount of time um
well the other thing
one gives it gives it a purpose to the
universe right if the universe had
only inanimate objects like rocks and
stars and things like
black holes it wouldn't be able to think
about itself
and reason through how it all came to be
and how it evolved
in a sense we are the way in which the
universe is found
to know itself and you know there may be
others i don't know but
we're the only ones the only sentient
beings with this capacity to ask and
answer
abstract questions and that's just a
marvelous thing
how do you contextualize that like is it
poetic for you
is it religious like how do you make
sense of that
yeah you know it's some combination of
poetic religious
spiritual for sure uh
you know we all try to find meaning in
our lives and there are many ways
one can find meaning but one way that
i've found
is to contribute in some small way
hopefully a large way but at least in
some small way
to humankind's understanding of the
cosmos
of this amazing and magnificent universe
in which we live
and one thing i try to do in my
semester-long course at berkeley
is to show students not only the
magnificence of the universe and its
contents
but that through this process of careful
thinking observation experiments
we can come to and have been coming
to a pretty good understanding of how it
all works
there are a lot of things we still don't
understand absolutely
new things continue to be found i mean
as a scientist it would get boring if
there weren't new unexplained things to
continually answer
that's why i'm in it but we also
understand
a lot as well and you know testament a
testament to that is the fact that we
can build
airplanes and rocket ships and
pacemakers
and and these electronic devices through
which we can
talk no matter where we are in the world
right
that's a testament to the success of
science
yeah it's it that
when so i'm not a religious person but
when i
think about the relationship between the
cosmos sort of how vast it is
and how much there still is to
understand and yet
through the things that we've discovered
so far how we're able to
shape the world around us i'm obsessed
with this idea that skills have utility
and there's another way to say it would
be
knowledge has utility insights have
utility and getting people to understand
you don't
read a book to check you know a box on
the list you don't go to college to
impress your parents
you don't even look at the stars just to
say that you can it's
you're getting data back from that and
that data then lets you do something and
one of the like you talk about wanting
to have an impact on people one of the
things i want
people to get is like when you learn
about something
you then can build a bridge
erect a building create gps travel to
the stars like
it that fills me with
wonder it feel fills me with a sense of
agency
and if you begin to tell yourself the
right story then it becomes also meaning
and purpose
and like that's the juice and it's so
crazy
like when you look at the stars what do
you
feel i i feel basically all the things
that i just said and i have such a hard
time putting it into words but what do
you feel when you
look up yeah no actually i think you
expressed it quite eloquently
you know i feel a oneness with the
universe
that i'm part of this grand structure
that
evolved over 13 or 14 billion years
and here i am a small subset as far as
we can
tell that that can strive to understand
it you know
and i don't have to be the one who makes
the discoveries you know i'm an
astrophysicist but
i gain joy in learning what biologists
have
have determined you know the the human
genome project
crispr cast nine all these advances that
can be
amazing for the benefit of humans but
also just
intellectually so provocative so
enthralling so ah inspiring right
that we are these creatures that can
come to this understanding
and you know going back to something you
said at the very beginning you know
general relativity
was this weird theory of warped space
and time that some crazy hair
you know theoretical physicist you know
albert einstein of course dreamed up
fast forward 50 years and even 100 years
actually
and here we have gps which with all of
its
military and commercial applications
that simply would not work
if you didn't take into account the
warping of the
passage of time depending on where you
are in a gravitational field
and an even better example is quantum
physics you know a century ago
physicists were thinking about the world
weren't interested in making a better
toaster
or or improving cars or whatever
there were two major questions
understanding the nature of light
and understanding the existence of atoms
and you might think well those are just
you know
intellectual titillation it doesn't
really matter but it does because fast
forward a century
and today's micro world the half a
billion
transistors at the head of a pin
basically right
moore's law all that that's built on an
understanding
of the quantum world the nano world you
know these
little seven nanometer pixels that are
now
infiltrating electronic devices and
storage units and stuff
that was all an unanticipated spinoff
of sort of blue sky wondering about
the world and our place in it and how it
works
so you know that's the best of both
worlds we satisfy our intellectual
curiosity
and we do things that are for the
benefit of humankind
yeah it's a great way to look at it um
as you were talking it made me remember
something i've heard you say in
interviews before
that as your wife knows every now and
then you sort of wake up in the middle
of the night screaming that we may know
nothing like
like there might be some huge revelation
coming
that will show that we're sort of as
both brilliant and ignorant as somebody
like newton right who couldn't have
conceived of what was to come and yet
gave us these tremendous breakthroughs
do you think
because when i i can sort of grasp
the big concepts of astronomy
but when it gets down to the to the
quantum realm
i start freaking out in like a really
fun way but like the double slit
experiment
in um in physics quantum physics
particle wave look at don't look at and
things change like
that freaks me out in a way that i love
so much
and in science you often talk sort of
the
the miracle the the axiomatic part you
get down to where it's like
you just have to trust that this thing
is real do you think there will ever be
a point where there's sort of no more
miracle to get to where we know like
what the vacuum is made of or
like i'm not even sure how to ask that
question
do we ever find the base it's a great
question tom it's something that
scientists and in particular physicists
struggle with all the time
the short answer is probably we'll never
have such a theory
and the reason is is that science and in
particular physics
is not so much after the truth with a
capital t
reality with an uppercase r but rather
a description a quantitative description
that allows us to
explain quantitatively the results of
experiments that have been done
and to make predictions about the likely
outcomes of experiments that have not
yet been done
to the degree that we can explain what's
been done and make predictions that then
get
verified we pat ourselves in the back
and we say we have a pretty good working
model
but we never know whether there will be
some experiment in the future
that does not conform with the
predictions or expectations of our model
of our description
in that case it'll have to be modified
sometimes in small ways
other times in fundamental ways like
einstein's
relativity which was a completely
different way of of looking at newtonian
mechanics
and then the quantum world you know that
that deals with the very small
and you have general relativity that
deals with the very large
if we someday have a quantum theory of
gravity that's
well verified and tested and explains
situations where there's a lot of mass
in a small volume we may pat ourselves
in the back and say hey this is working
we have the final theory but who's to
say that
some young whippersnapper someday won't
find an
experiment that doesn't agree with that
and so
a new modification will have to be made
so it's always a description
a model within the context of what our
brains of k
are capable of constructing it's unclear
whether this is the underlying reality
right
yeah that that question to me is um too
tantalizing
to leave alone and i'm not sure why i
find it so
interesting because certainly somebody
like myself is never
going to make use of that knowledge it's
just not what i've aimed myself at
um but there is something magical to
einstein's question of i want to know
god's thoughts and everything else is
just details
what do you think about that like i
think he had a comp well
as we look back on his life i think we
have a complicated relationship to what
he meant
by god um he may have had a very clear
relationship
but what do you think about a sentiment
like that do you find that equally
intriguing to you is that just
not worth pondering yeah uh
it's an interesting question because you
know there are books of
einsteinian quotes you know there's like
a thousand of them or something he's a
very quotable
person and there's a mark a remarkable
number of them in which he brings up god
and this has led many people to think
that he was a deeply religious
person in the classical sense it's not
true
it turns out that his god was what's
called spinosa's god
it's sort of the god that that is
nature that explains sort of you know
the ways in which the natural world
works it's sort of the god of the
natural world
he did not believe in the classical god
who's sort of
you know watching over things and maybe
even you know influencing them along the
way
so when he said he wants to know god's
secrets
i interpret that to mean that he wants
to know
really to the degree possible what are
the fundamental laws
quote unquote for laws because even he
admitted that
these are all just descriptions and
models
but nevertheless the farther down the
path you go
the more complete you think your
description or model
is because it explains and is consistent
with
more and more observed phenomena and so
we begin to think
of it as being the reality
even if deep in our hearts and of course
i didn't know einstein but
i speculate that deep in his heart he
probably would have admitted
that this isn't necessarily the reality
it's just a description that happens to
work really well
and for example in a quantum theory of
gravity
you don't even have curved space time
you have these little particles called
gravitons
that are zipping back and forth between
say earth
and the sun telling each other that
we're here and
for the earth to be gravitationally
attracted to the sun and same thing with
the moon
and the earth whereas in his theory he
thought of it
as being the consequence of a curved
space-time but that's just a description
or a model
that happens to lead to calculations
that can be done
relatively easily and whose outcomes can
be
compared with things like the orbit of
the moon
or earth okay but again it's just a
model it's just a description
and i think he understood that that's
all it is but was hoping that through
the
end of this process we will someday know
the final
theory even if he perhaps didn't think
that that was ever
really truly possible there's a lot of
interesting things around there so
um one the reason i said that i've been
waiting whatever 32 years for this
interview
is when i was a kid i was
just unable to wrap my head around the
idea of an expanding universe
which i know is one of your areas of
expertise because i just kept thinking
all right hold on
if you expand a city you expand it into
the areas that are forest or whatever
there was something there if you build a
house
there was land there before you built
the house what
is the universe expanding into even as
you get into gravitational waves right
like you imagine this thing going up and
down
what what's below it what was above it
like
i even now i'm like i don't understand
how what what are we expanding into
right
so here's where i like to use analogies
all right um
first to answer your question there are
two ways of answering it we aren't
necessarily expanding
into anything and i'll clarify that in a
minute
or you can think of it as expanding into
a fourth spatial dimension
so we have x y and z okay
this would be a fourth dimension that we
can't see
we can't touch we can't experience it's
mathematically describable but
physically
inaccessible okay can we before you move
on can we describe
what you mean by physically inaccessible
are you saying that hey we've got eyes
ears touched they
we have an umvelt we have confused that
umvelt with
all things and once you get beyond our
sensory perception
because that was one thing i struggled
with a lot until i
came to understand sort of david
eagleman's idea of
you're just a mr potato head and you
could read
magnetic signals but we don't have those
receptors
a shark you know can sense magnetic uh
or electrical
movements so you can actually trick a
shark i still can't believe this is true
but i've seen the footage
you can put a a plate on the floor of
the ocean that has an electrical current
that mimics the electrical current of a
flopping fish an injured fish
and the shark will just sit there
attacking the plate all day long
because it's actually picking up on the
electrical signals
that made me realize whoa like there is
a lot of data that we just
can't perceive and so because i know
what you're about to
explain uh is that what you mean by we
can't perceive it
it's it's beyond even that sort of
perception you know the shark thing
if we have the right sensors and
scientists have done this this is how
they know
they can detect those signals even
though with our eyes we cannot but
there's all kinds of for example
electromagnetic radiation light that our
eyes don't perceive
you know radio signals and x-rays and
stuff
what i'm talking about are actually
other dimensions
so here's where i like to use an analogy
and you know a piece of advice i give to
people to clarify your ideas with an
analogy when you can
so i'm gonna i've got this balloon here
all right i anticipated this question
tom
and so i'm gonna
suppose that this is a hypothetical
universe
where you're constrained to be on the
balloon
actually more technically within the
rubber itself
and you can only go forward and backward
left and right
and any combination of those two motions
okay
along the surface or or through the
balloon the laws of physics prevent you
light or anything else from going into
the balloon or
out okay by do you is there a known
mechanism by which we are stopped
well in this hypothetical universe no
i'm just asking you to suppose it so
in our universe the mechanism would be
that
all the particles light protons
electrons
are restricted to the usual xyz
dimensions in this room okay and we're
still trying to figure out why
in string theory the reason is because
every particle
is a vibrational mode of a little
package of energy called a string
and the ends of the string are tied
down they're anchored to this xyz
space okay but whatever the mechanism
you're restricted
in this case to only being within the
balloon
now the balloon can expand and i
forgot to bring my little stickers but
in my classes i put little stickers on
this
and the stickers move away from one
another and if you imagine a sticker is
a galaxy like our milky way
you would see the other galaxies moving
away
each of them thinks they're at the
center but none of them is in the unique
center
the unique center is the center of the
balloon right
but that's not part of the universe as
i've hypothetically
defined it the universe is only the
balloon
the center is in a mathematically
describable
but physically inaccessible dimension
and so too is the expansion
i blow some more not too much otherwise
i'll get a little bang
a little bit of nerd humor there but it
expands into this dimension
that we can describe very easily
mathematically okay
the r dimension in polar coordinates
but the dude in the
in the balloon does not experience
the r dimension outward or inward
they only say we are at r equals six
centimeters or whatever it is okay
they know about are extending farther
outward and inward at least
mathematically they know about that
but they can't actually go there or see
it or anything like that so in that
sense
now take our three-dimensional universe
think about a three-dimensional sphere
not the inside of the sphere but
something that wraps
around a fourth dimension we're
expanding
into that fourth mathematical dimension
even though we can't see it or even
conduct any experiments
unlike the shark case that show us that
it's there
okay does that clarify things a little
bit for you
that is extraordinarily transformative
in my life and i
actually mean that literally i now know
why you have won so many teaching awards
but now what you've done is simply give
me the next question to ask which is
extraordinarily powerful and what a gift
but now i'm going to ask it and let's
see where we go so
the part about string theory really
helped with the breakthrough
in that there's something that we don't
know yet
that there's some force i'm going to use
my
language and if i misspeak please stop
me but
there is some as of yet unknown force
that is anchoring us within the rubber
of the balloon and that's really
important for anybody who's not watching
to
to think about the universe being only
that layer of rubber and your entire
life
is within that layer of rubber and there
is a force
as yet unknown that keeps us in that
layer of rubber
make sure that we can only see within
that layer of rubber and even detect
only within that layer of rubber so now
my question is
what what is that like so the r
dimension
and this is using analogy so i look up
at the stars
i have this sense of wonder and awe and
it triggers in me and i don't know how
much you
um know about sort of the other side of
my life but actually right
and impact theory is meant to be a film
tv studio the whole nine
and i'm always drawn to science fiction
because it you get to play the
well what if it were like this game and
one of the
analogies that i find just absolutely
exhilarating is uh and i had somebody
tweet me
this question to ask you is in men in
black
at the very end of the first one they do
this pull out pull out pull
out pull out until you zoom out far
enough of our universe to realize that
we're really just
a marble in an alien universe and
everything that we think of as
is the universe in existence is you know
this actually really really small thing
and this idea of bubble universes
where were there some greater which
still doesn't answer the question of
what
but you know there's some greater thing
holding this
foam of bubbles in every bubble as a
universe
yeah that to me is i want that to be
true
so badly like there's just something
about the the
just it's so big and so unknown now
let me anchor sort of where i'm going i
read once
that gravity becomes where everybody in
the
physics and astronomy community pay
attention because it's the one sort of
mysterious force
and all the other ones make sense but
there's something about gravity's too
weak
if i'm not mistaken can you explain that
right so there's a lot to unpack there i
mean
right questions you know you should
clone yourself and become an
astrophysicist all right
i'd have to get a lot better at math so
first of all yeah
the idea of multiple universes has now
gained real respectability i mean
card-carrying
physicists astrophysicists are thinking
seriously about the possibility because
we could discuss this later on but ideas
about how our universe
was born and evolved with time naturally
lead to other
pockets that are essentially independent
of ours and so there could be
you know a gazillion of them there could
be an infinite number of them okay
so i'm you know i i like that idea a lot
for a lot of reasons
now getting back to your specific thing
about gravity
yeah if you look at the four fundamental
forces of nature
there's two nuclear forces that keep the
constituents of protons and neutrons
together and they keep
protons and neutrons together in a
nucleus that's called the
strong nuclear force then there's a
thing called the weak nuclear force
which sort of keeps the
neutron together in a sense then there's
electromagnetism which keeps the
electron and a proton
in a hydrogen atom together and then
there's gravity which keeps
us to the surface of earth when you look
at these four
forces in terms of their natural
strengths relative to one another
gravity is like 38
orders of magnitude 10 to the 38 power
weaker than these other ones which you
know they're not all exactly the same
but at least they're comparable to one
another
but gravity is like 38 orders of
magnitude weaker than electromagnetism
which is to say that the electron and a
proton in a hydrogen atom
feel essentially no gravitational force
they are
completely and utterly dominated by the
electromagnetic force
well a big question is why is gravity so
weak
and one idea is that although the
particles i described in string theory
are these little open-ended strings that
are tethered to the rubber that we just
talked about
the carriers of gravity these gravitons
are thought to be loops and they can
escape from this rubber balloon
and go floating off into that other
dimension which is called the bulk
bulk this is like a membrane
a brain in the bulk and there are other
membranes elsewhere
but if most of the gravitons are
floating around in the bulk
then there are not many of them in the
membrane
that is our universe that's one idea
of why gravity might be so weak and so
those those gravitons would actually be
having an impact in our membrane or no
um not really except that
the corollary of what i just said is
that gravitons from
other universes in this bubble theory
could
reach and get into our membrane and
that might be one way of testing
for the presence of these other
universes which at this point are
completely speculative
it's an interesting idea that seems to
fit well with a lot of our other ideas
but there's not a shred of direct
evidence
for these other universes but this
might be a way of finding that evidence
if
someone were to someday directly detect
gravitons
and find some way of figuring out
whether they came
from our piece of rubber or some other
piece of rumor
somewhere out there i don't know how you
would do that but it's within the realm
of speculation at least
is anybody asking the question around
whether we could ever
like us as a whole human being or even
with an instrument
but sort of rip through the membrane
and exit out into the i forget what you
just called it but that
other space the what the bulk a bulk
yeah so has anybody speculated can we
theoretically
cross into that region yeah um great
question
black holes which are regions of space
where matter is compressed so much
that nothing not even light can escape
okay
can be thought of as rips in the fabric
of space-time
because they end up with a singularity
either infinite density that is you know
a finite amount of matter in zero volume
or if you bring in quantum physics maybe
it's just a very very high density you
know but not infinite
but in any case it's definitely a
weirdness
in our otherwise smoothly varying space
time
and the equations even suggest that
on the other side of the black hole in
our universe
it opens up into another black hole in
one of these
other universes or in a very distant
part of our universe
and so if we could find well if this is
true this hypothesis
and if we could find a way to hold the
throat of the black hole open
so that we could safely pass through
there might be a way
of actually experiencing
that is getting into or at least getting
information from
these other universes again this is
highly speculative
but these would be essentially rips or
wormholes
in space that give us access to other
universes
very highly speculative now this is this
is the stuff i
i absolutely love so let's play with the
speculation for a minute so
um one there's a few things around this
i've always been super curious about
forgive me for
asking sort of rudimentary questions
what is it
about so you talked about the throat so
i know
there's um probably a gravitational
effect that as you cross the event
horizon would just rip you apart
because your your toes would be more
impacted by gravity than your head and
so you would just literally disintegrate
so i understand that
but um what then if we
talk about opening the throat are we
somehow stopping
that that gravitational um
discrepancy like what what do we mean by
holding it open
yeah okay so the effect you're
describing
uh of being ripped apart is
affectionately known by astrophysicists
as spaghettification because you get
stretched in the long direction and
squeezed in the
you know along your width uh
that actually happens for a relatively
low mass black hole
maybe 10 times the mass of our sun it
indeed
happens outside the boundary the
so-called
event horizon of the black hole and
you'd get ripped apart
but it turns out for gigantic black
holes a billion times the mass of our
sun
like the ones that exist yeah pardon
that exists yeah yeah you know um in
april of
2019 just two years ago the event
horizon telescope
team showed using
a bunch of radio telescopes on different
continents
they showed this amazing picture of a
black hole in another galaxy
actually the silhouette or the shadow of
a black hole since
no light comes out of a black hole you
can't actually get a picture of the
black hole
but this is the silhouette of a black
hole
and it's in a galaxy called m87
55 million light years away which means
it took
light you know 55 million years to reach
us
but that corroborated the evidence we
have
from other lines of reasoning and
measurement that these black holes
really do exist in the centers of
galaxies and our own milky way galaxy
has a black hole roughly four million
times the mass of the sun and that was
in fact that discovery
was recognized with the nobel prize in
physics just last year
in 2020 to two colleagues of mine
reinhard guenzel
here at berkeley and in germany and
andrea gaz a colleague of mine
at ucla her team and guenzel's team
showed really clear evidence that our
milky way galaxy has one of these
so-called supermassive black holes
so for the supermassive ones you
actually don't get ripped apart
just outside the event horizon the
boundary
you get ripped apart when you're closer
to the singularity to the middle
but regardless the worst ripping apart
and then squishing together occurs at
the center the singularity
so by holding the throat open i actually
mean
preventing the singularity from existing
and squishing you and along the way
preventing the
gravitational forces from first ripping
you apart
you got to do all those things you got
to be not ripped apart
and then not squeezed in to an
infinitesimal point almost
in the singularity so you need something
with a negative gravitational
effect like negative mass and that's
invoking the tooth fairy right now
because again maybe some day someone
will figure out a way to either find
this stuff
or make this stuff so it's not
completely
out of the realm of possibility and i
always like to be
you know forward thinking you know not
everything is possible but
some things that have not yet been
proven to be impossible
might be possible although very very
difficult you know
that is intriguing so uh the singularity
for people that don't know that
um when we get into the math because i
can give you a layperson's explanation
of it's the point beyond which we can no
longer predict what happens
but what is the mass saying that it's
infinitely dense
yeah so what's called classical general
relativity which doesn't
include quantum effects so it can't be
anywhere close to the final word okay
nevertheless you know classical physics
newtonian physics has served us well
general relativity through gps has
served us well blah blah blah
the classical prediction is that no
matter how much matter you throw into a
black hole
it all squeezes down to a mathematical
point
now a mathematical point has zero volume
r the radius is zero so r cubed
you know the volume is zero as well so
that means an
infinite density mass per unit volume
um so no matter what you throw in you'd
just squish to an infinite density
again none of us really believe that
because
all other times when we've thought about
nature
on sufficiently small scales we've had
to introduce quantum physics and so
it is thought that the next big thing
will be a quantum theory of gravity uh
and you know hawking made
steps in that direction he tried to
unify quantum physics and general
relativity
but even if we don't get squished to an
infinite density
no doubt will be squished to a very very
very very very high density
unless we find some sort of
anti-gravitating material
that can preclude the formation of the
singularity
and the associated deleterious effects
on our existence
that's amazing okay so i'm going to keep
asking ignorant questions because
i feel like i'm sort of making progress
in my layman's understanding here
uh okay so we're worried about getting
squished down way too small when i heard
you describe
that it it has infinite density
as a lay person it sounds like i may
have accidentally come to the same
conclusion that
that's sort of the only thing we can
rule out we know it can't be
infinite density is that what gives
birth to this idea of on the other side
of the black hole there has to be
something spitting things out
because otherwise it just seems like it
it
and again i just don't know anything
about this but it doesn't seem like
you could infinitely shove
every quantum particle down into
a something with zero radius right like
something
it seems like something has to happen
yeah yeah yeah
and you know by the way your your
questions are perfectly reasonable and
this is a very
abstract you know mind-bending topic
that a lot of people are interested in
and so i get the same kinds of very good
questions
over and over again so they're great
questions okay
so the idea of it spitting out the other
side or at least opening up into a black
hole the other side doesn't come
from the impossibility of infinite
density
yes we don't know how to get an infinite
density but let's just suppose you could
okay the mathematics still
opens up to another black hole and
it's just because can i stop you there
so because i didn't understand the first
time but i just let it go
so if it's opening up to another black
hole isn't that just something also
sucking things in yes
but from the perspective of something
that went in
on the other side it can come
out so if it is that hawking radiation
yeah well yeah um well that's related
i'll get to that in a second
if it goes into a black hole in our
universe
it can't come out of the same black hole
in our universe but it can come out
in a different universe it's called a
white hole in that case
okay do we have white holes in our
universe no we've never seen one and
this is why
a number of us think that this is just a
theoretical speculation
and that there are no real such objects
okay because you can't throw
you know keep the throat of the wormhole
open or whatever
the white holes would be very obvious
they would be things
that are squirting out lots of matter
they're very powerful they're very
obvious
they're not hard to find like a black
hole that
doesn't emit any light these things
would be super obvious and yet we've
never seen one
so but but at least theoretically it's a
possibility
that even stems when you have
the theory with an infinite density the
infinite density is okay
it's just that you have a mathematical
solution to the equations
that gives you another universe now
often in physics
we get solutions that
you know have a positive and a negative
sign
so let me give you an example suppose i
construct an experiment
with a pendulum or something that gives
me
the mass of an object a paper weight
and i tell you the the square of the
mass tom
is 100 square grams and then i ask you
what is the mass what would be your
answer if the
square of the mass is a hundred square
grams the mass is
a hundred squared if it's not that i
have no idea you have no idea how much
math is a black box to me so
so it's this you know 10 squared is 100
so the square root of 100 is 10 okay
perfect
so you'd say the mass is 10 grams if the
square of the mass
was 100 square grams okay
but an equally good solution is negative
10 grams okay uh
and by the way when you squared it that
was an easy mistake to make because the
way i phrased it i now see
it was ambiguous what i meant i promise
you it's not not your fault
this is a yes but what i meant really
was not to take the square of 100 but
take the square root so that was an easy
thing to make but
the point is is that the square root of
100 is either negative 10
or positive 10 grams
so we throw out the negative 10 gram
solution as being
unphysical right it's meaningless so the
mass of your paper weight was
10 grams not a very good paper
paperweight i should have taken a a
different example okay a little
ball bearing or something but we throw
that out as being
unphysical well you know who's to say
someday someone won't find something
with negative mass maybe they will
maybe they won't so in the case of black
holes
a solution to the equations is this
black hole or white hole in another
universe but we don't know whether
that's a physically meaningful
solution that nature actually chooses to
adopt
or whether it's just a mathematically um
possible but physically irrelevant
solution
like the negative 10 grams currently
seems to be
at least to me but again maybe someday
someone will find
what the negative 10 grams is you know
and there have been
examples of this in the history of
physics a physicist named paul dirac
about a century ago combined einstein's
special theory of relativity where the
speed of light is the maximum speed
with the fundamental equation of quantum
physics called the schrodinger equation
he came up with something called the
dirac equation the relativistic
schrodinger equation
and out popped a particle
that looked pretty much like an electron
which has a negative mass but it had a
positive mass
and at first he thought this was
unphysical but then he said well why
don't you know why don't you people look
for it experimental physicists and
they looked for it and sure enough there
it was
they found the neck the positive
electron it's called a positron
so um you know there have been cases in
physics
where the initially ridiculous looking
solution
or possible mathematical solution turned
out to be
something that corresponds to physical
reality but there have also been cases
where we've not found
a physical counterpart the white hole
being among the things we've never found
another example is particles that travel
faster than light
in special relativity that's not
impossible they're called
tachyons they're traveling always faster
than light
and to slow down to the speed of light
would take an infinite amount of energy
well physicists have been looking for
tachyons
for decades and they've never found them
maybe they don't exist
or maybe we just haven't found them yet
we we don't yet know
see so we're exploring all these
interesting mathematical solutions
to see if they correspond to physical
reality
does that help you out very much so and
so now i have a question tell me why
this is wrong
so as you're describing and obviously
i'm existing in the abstraction layer of
analogy but
as you're describing this white hole and
my
my um you know whatever just the way my
brain works the sort of leap it makes
when i think about
a black hole just sucking in all this
stuff all this stuff all this stuff all
the stuff
and you tell me that the math says that
there's sort of a black hole on the
other side of that but it would really
be this white hole
it makes me the leap my brain makes is
oh well on the other side
is a white hole is essentially the big
bang
so you cram on one side all this stuff
into a black hole cram cram cram cram
cram
and then it reaches some theoretical i
have no idea what
you know math it has to hit but it hits
some point
and now it has to eject and so what we
think of as a white hole we
we literally our entire universe is said
white hole
yeah that's a very profound thought
actually
uh there are fundamental ways
in which the mathematics of a finite
universe now by the way there might be
infinite universes but
the mathematics of a finite what we call
closed universe
like the 3d example of a balloon
is very similar to the mathematics of a
black hole
nothing can ever escape from this finite
volume this universe just like nothing
can ever escape
from a black hole okay it's just that
it's an expanding universe it was born
for reasons we don't yet understand
as an explosion but in a similar way you
can actually have a black hole within
our universe that initially is expanding
later on it'll go clunk and it'll
collapse but
you can create an initially expanding
black hole no problem
so in many ways the mathematics is
similar our universe can be thought of
as a black hole the fundamental
distinction
is that in our real universe a black
hole
is an object a structure where you've
compressed the matter
within this room for example and the
black hole
exists within the room that's
different from the whole universe being
the black hole
do you see the distinction there it's
kind of subtle a black hole
in our universe versus the whole
universe being
a black hole there is a difference but
mathematically there are a lot of
similarities
and there have been theoretical
physicists who have been exploring
that idea of our universe as being in a
sense
the ultimate black hole yeah oh man this
stuff is so
interesting and the i
i struggle with one idea which is
you can be anything you want to be but
not everything and
it really really bothers me that none of
us will live long enough to see
all of the answers um but
when i start thinking about the the
notion of
einstein sort of in the later years of
his life being trapped by his own
ideology
and really struggling with the
consequences of some of his own theories
um that gets really terrifying talk to
me about
how so even in this conversation
i form a notion and then you'll say
something and ah that notion
crumbles apart and now i have to form a
new notion
how do we stay open-minded enough so
that
as you get more advanced in your career
you have deeper wisdom you have more
sort of threads to pull on but you're
also more likely to have woven a false
tapestry that traps you
what do you do to be open to that new
information
yeah yeah it it's um
this is a this is a disease that
afflicts
quite a few scientists theoretical
physicists
like einstein who become very
set in their ways i mean einstein was a
real revolutionary when he was young he
was thinking of all these ideas
that other people thought were crazy
and his weakness later in life was that
he became so
wedded as you said to his
tapestry that he wasn't willing to
accept
new ideas and the fundamental idea that
he was not willing to accept
was quantum physics ironically because
of his many gigantic breakthroughs
that's the one
for which he actually won the nobel
prize for an explanation of something
called the photoelectric effect
that's a quantum effect he explained it
won the nobel prize for that
not for special relativity not for
general relativity
and yet an inability to come to grips
what
with what quantum mechanics was trying
to tell us about nature
was his fundamental problem while he was
trying to come up with a theory of
everything
it really didn't have quantum mechanics
so we have to
take those historical cases and keep
them
front and center in mind
work hard at maintaining an open mind so
you don't get fossilized
so you don't get set in your ways and i
would say that experimental physicists
and observational astronomers such as
myself i'm not a theorist
though i like theory we don't
fall victim to that as often as the
theorists because
we get better and better with time in
some ways an experimental physicist
learns more mistakes and how to avoid
them
so does an observational astronomer we
build upon our past
experiences and thus are able to do our
jobs in many ways
better with time
but the true blue sky thinking theorist
has to watch out
for this affliction and consciously
work at keeping an open mind yep
let's talk about athletic greens the
all-in-one daily drink to support better
health and peak
performance with so many stressors in
life it's difficult to maintain
effective nutritional habits and give
our bodies the nutrients
it needs to thrive busy schedules poor
sleep
exercise stress or simply not eating
enough
of the foods that your body needs that's
where athletic greens can help
their daily drink is like nutritional
insurance for your body that's delivered
straight
to your door developed from a complex
blend of 75 vitamins minerals and whole
foods sourced ingredients
athletic greens is a greens powder
engineered to help fill the nutritional
gaps in your diet
athletic greens continues to obsessively
improve this
one holistic formula based on the latest
research
producing 53 iterations over the last
decade
and counting it's lifestyle friendly
whether you eat keto
paleo vegan dairy-free or gluten-free
and contains less than one gram of sugar
without compromising on
taste so many people on our team at
impact theory are talking all about
their experiences with athletic greens
they love the taste and how they can get
the micronutrients from various veggies
without having to cook or buy groceries
so when our marketing
associate chase is busy and he knows
he's not going to be able to easily eat
any greens
he can bring along athletic greens and
make sure that he's still
getting adequate micronutrients from the
powder
without having to eat an entire farm's
worth of a salad
so whether you're looking for peak
performance or better health
covering your bases with athletic greens
makes investing in your energy
immunity and gut health each day simple
tasty
and efficient so whether you're looking
for peak performance or
better health covering your bases with
athletic greens makes investing in your
energy
immunity and gut health each day simple
tasty and efficient and right now
athletic
greens is doubling down on supporting
your immune system during the winter
months
they're offering our audience a free one
year supply of vitamin d and five
travel packs with your first purchase
simply visit athleticgreens.com
impact theory again that's
athleticgreens.com
impact theory and get your free one-year
supply of vitamin d
and five free travel packs today
all right guys give it a shot take care
and be legendary
all right let's talk about the thing
that trapped einstein so i know the
thing that he really pushed back on
is what he called spooky action at a
distance um can you describe that
for people absolutely yeah it's
it's the essence of quantum mechanics uh
and
very very spooky in
special relativity einstein showed quite
conclusively and this has now been uh
verified with
thousands if not millions of experiments
that
no material particle with non-zero mass
okay a photon a carrier of light has
zero mass by the way
it travels at the speed of light but no
particle with non-zero mass
can reach the speed of light let alone
exceed it
because it would take an infinite amount
of energy to do so
and as i said you know large hadron
collider
the stanford linear accelerator fermi
lab near chicago
all these accelerators have validated
that concept
over and over and over again takes a
huge amount of energy to get particles
going at close to the speed of light
we can't get them to reach the speed of
light
the problem in quantum physics is that
if you create
a part two two particles out of one
and let's say that that first particle
wasn't spinning at all there's uh you
know particles can spin
sort of like tops in quantum physics
it's a bit more complicated than that
but
think of it as spinning if the particle
originally isn't spinning
but then you create two particles one of
which is spinning
clockwise and the other one
counterclockwise
as seen from above let's say spin up and
spin down
quantum mechanics says that until a
measurement
is made you don't know which way the
particle
this one is spinning up or down
clockwise or counterclockwise
or this one and it's not just that
we don't know the particle doesn't know
and what that's really saying is that
the particle
is a quantum superposition of both
spin up and spin down it's both states
simultaneously until a measurement is
made
at which point it has to adopt one of
the two states by a process that in
quantum mechanics
is still not well described it's not
described for example by the schrodinger
equation it's a bit of a mystery
nevertheless once you make a measurement
spin up let's say the other particle
has to be spinned down instantaneously
in order for them to cancel out and be
spin zero
that means the other particle learns as
quickly as you want
instantaneously that a measurement has
been made on the first particle
but that appears to be information or
you know a substance a particle
traveling
faster than the speed of light i forgot
to say this but
a corollary of einstein's that no
particle can travel faster than light is
that more fundamentally
no information can travel through space
faster than light
that's a very important part that i
forgot to say but here it looks like
information about the measurement of
this particle
reached this other particle essentially
instantaneously
that violates the fundamental result
or consequence of special relativity
einstein
called it spooky action at a distance
he never believed it it's called the
einstein podolski rosen paradox because
he wrote a paper
with two of his postdocs or something
and you might say well
so far i've only described theory what
about experiments do they
validate this yes they do many
experiments have been done where the
particles are farther and farther and
farther apart
and you wait until they're really far
apart you make a measurement of one of
them
and then essentially simultaneously just
a short time later
you make a measurement of the other one
there's no way that traveling
at the speed of light any signal could
have gone from the first one to the
second one
telling it that a measurement had been
made and yet the other one knew that a
measurement had been made
and knew which way it had to spin in
order to be
self-consistent that is so crazy
it's totally crazy it's called quantum
entanglement okay
it is totally crazy sounding
and you know as as dick feinman used to
say
you know relativity if you think about
it enough it sort of becomes second
nature
even general relativity if you think
about big masses enough
and big speeds and all that it becomes
second nature
but if you ever feel comfortable with
quantum physics
it probably means you haven't thought
about it sufficiently deeply
and he's the person of all the people
i've ever met who had the deepest
most intuitive view of nature of anyone
that i met and he basically said
if you think you understand quantum
mechanics you haven't thought about it
enough
okay yeah richard feynman is a a very
interesting character so as somebody
that knew him
what what was it in in the things that
he said
or or things that he discovered that
made you and
so many others say that this guy really
had just an
unusual intuitive understanding yeah
it you know it's just that he he had
this way of looking at things he
he had a way of of thinking about what
nature is actually doing
and only later would he work out the
mathematics
but the idea came first and
one of the best known examples of this
are these things called feynman diagrams
where
he'd write down these little squiggles
little pictures showing the interactions
of particles
and then he made up equations that you
have to apply
every time you know a particle splits
into two or whatever but it almost
looked like
chicken scratches that were pretty
arbitrary to his colleagues initially
but it was his way of thinking about the
world and then he developed it
mathematically
and he could do on a chalkboard in half
an hour
a problem that using the tried and true
brute force method might take 50 or 100
pages
of very complex calculations it would
give the same answer
you know but in a much simpler way so
again this goes back to what we were
talking about where
it turns out these are equivalent
theories but his way of looking at it
was so different and so fresh that it
looked like a completely different model
even though
if you delve into it and this is
something that freeman dyson did
he showed that the different theories of
or the different formulations of what's
called quantum electrodynamics
which discusses the electromagnetic
interactions between protons and
electrons
in an atom things like that the three
major theories that existed
were basically equivalent but
looked very different and feynman's was
by far the most intuitive
so it was this intuition about the world
that struck me uh as being quite
astonishing
and you know i i knew him now
close well basically 40 years ago now
when i was a graduate student at caltech
and in those 40 years since then i've
never met anyone
who had that kind of advanced and very
intuitive mental notion of how nature
works
yeah there's something about him that
certainly lasted and from what i've
heard
in very iconoclastic sort of uh
bombastic personality
uh yeah sound like a pretty interesting
guy
he was an interesting guy he he had a
very interesting personality i mean i i
think
one of the things that sort of irritated
some of his caltech
fellow faculty is that um you know
he claimed not to like attention and
stuff
but then he wrote all these books about
his life and
he he kind of went out of his way to
tell stories about himself with or
without embellishment
i don't know i wasn't there to
experience them firsthand but they
certainly seem quite amazing stories
and so if you don't want attention why
would you go around
telling these stories about yourself but
you know i liked him a lot and i liked
his stories
and the other thing that rubbed off on
me from him was that
he felt very strongly that if you can't
explain something
in a reasonably simple way to someone
who does not have advanced knowledge of
science and especially physics
then you probably don't understand it
very well yourself
and that's one of the reasons i enjoy
teaching
the introductory astronomy class at cal
i enjoy being in lots of science
documentaries i give a lot of public
talks i do these interviews and stuff
because
it gives me a chance to explain
science to the general public and often
in the middle of the explanation
even some of the ones i've given you tom
i'll be totally honest
in my mind i'm thinking once this is all
done i've got to go back and think about
this some more because
though i said the words i'm not sure i
really understand what those words mean
okay
i'll be perfectly i i get that and i
think that's really powerful that you do
that it's
you know i'm sure a huge part of the
reason that you're as good as you are is
you don't just go
ah i got away with it you know it's like
you want to go and keep keep learning i
love that
keep keep learning keep uh striving
for a better understanding of the world
i mean you mentioned that you'll never
know
death and blah blah blah one of the
things that most bothers me about
death is that i'll never know what
what ideas are raised and shown to be
correct
in the future i'll never know what what
ultimately becomes of human society of
of the planet earth and
and so on and i know that's the way it
is but
it bothers me yeah it bothers me because
in my finite time i want to learn
as much as i can and so i i run a lot i
i jog a lot i know you're really into
fitness and stuff and so
you know books on tape podcasts you know
lex
friedman's thing been listening to a lot
of those your things books on tape
audible it's fantastic
i don't have that much time to sit and
read i do sometimes but
i have a lot more time an hour a day to
run
and walk and take hikes and i listen to
things at the time
so i'm continually learning i am
obsessed with that idea
uh it's what i call transitional moments
so it could be the gym
it could be brushing my teeth walking
from one place to another
cooking a meal i am always listening to
a podcast or uh youtube video in fact oh
my god
anybody if you if you have made it this
far let me tell you right now you've got
to check out alex's great courses
which are phenomenal uh amazing man
the fact that people like you have taken
the time to
create these extraordinary classes and
make them available uh i feel like the
age that we're living through
where youtube is available like i know
you will remember this i remember this
having to go to the local universities
library
to do homework because there was no
internet
your family didn't have enough books to
like even begin to scratch the surface
and the fact that now you can put the
most random search into youtube and
somebody's got a video for you
and usually there's dozens or hundreds
of videos
it's really extraordinary it's an
amazing educational opportunity
and as you say there's a lot of free
stuff online you know the great courses
go on sale every once in a while quite
frequently where
they're just like a buck a lecture or
something like that it's it's ridiculous
i don't know how they make any money but
whatever
that's their that's their thing you know
clearly they're very successful at it
but
i did those courses as a way to
further educate the public not just uc
berkeley undergraduates
and those courses were done quite a
number of them you know before all these
youtube
free videos of various public lectures
became available
uh so those are a great compliment but
for a course you know from step one to
end
you get the full set of lectures that
essentially i give here at berkeley
that's that's amazing you know they're
extraordinary yeah
yeah so something i want to learn more
about i want to go back to quantum
entanglement
yeah so if you had to guess
or there must be theories what's your
favorite what what do people think is
happening how is
information traveling faster than the
speed of light yeah
you know honestly we don't know but
there are a number of ideas
um one of the most crazy sounding and
i'm still trying to come to grips with
it
is this thing that goes back nearly half
a century it's called the
everett or everton wheel or many worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics
this is different from the cosmological
multiverse where
we were talking about you know little
bubbles in some bigger hyperspace
or a universe that's becoming so big
that there are different little volumes
within it
that we can't communicate with but
nevertheless exist
those are all astronomical or
cosmological
multiverses but there's a thing called
the the quantum multiverse
and the idea is is that although
these particles were a quantum
superposition of spin up and spin down
and any particular measurement forced
it to decide so to speak in
anthropocentric terms
you know up or down
there's some other universe where it was
the opposite
and so in the many worlds interpretation
any time you have a quantum
superposition
and then a measurement is made
there exists then at least
mathematically
in what's called hilbert space which is
a mathematical space of all possible
universes
those other possibilities exist and
i just said those words and this is an
example of me
saying the words to you but not truly
understanding what the hell i'm talking
about
because i ask you know sean carroll and
other people will you know
sean is a big believer in this he has a
good podcast as well
by the way um and i say well where the
hell are these things and he said well
they're
they're in this mathematical hilbert
space and that just leaves me a little
bit cold
i'm the guy who knows which end of the
telescope to look through you know i'm a
hands-on person and i want to know where
the hell all these universes are okay
um so i'm trying to learn more about
that
and and uh come to better grips with it
but that's one idea okay and more and
more quantum physicists are
coming around to that that there exists
in some weird mathematical way
all these other universes but another
way of thinking about it
is that you know
once you made the measurement of one
particle
you don't know that the other particle
was spinning in the opposite direction
until you come and talk to the
experimental physicist who measured that
other particle
or you come and take a look at it
yourself or something like that
direct communication but that had to be
done
at speeds less than or equal to the
speed of light
so how do you know that the decision the
the measurement in
a sense isn't made when they come
together
to compare results now the other guy can
tell you well i
i made the measurement an hour ago long
before you came to visit me and that's
the way it was but in some weird
quantum mechanical entangled way
you know something isn't reality
until a measurement is made that two
observers
at the same place and the same time can
agree upon
okay so people can say stuff
but but the measurement from the other
person's perspective hasn't been
made until they come together and
compare results so
some people have been thinking about it
that way that we might just be confused
that it's not actually traveling yeah
yeah and then others i mean i think
feynman would have said
we are stuck in our classical way of
thinking
and even relativity is a classical
theory it's not a quantum theory
and there are many things in quantum
theory that
in fact violate your classical
sensibility
right it's just not the way the world
works
mr einstein there is spooky action at a
distance i mean
you can call it that you can call it
spooky
but that's just the way the universe is
it's probabilistic
and it's not even that a set of
particles
exists in which each of them is a
particular way
and you just don't happen to know which
way it is no they are all a quantum
superposition
until a measurement is made
and you know you might think that in the
end this is all just again theoretical
mumbo-jumbo and
intellectual titillation and why should
we pay people to think about this stuff
well
you know there's now this new area about
which i know very little just a little
bit
you know quantum computing where instead
of bits
ones and zeros you have qubits and you
might have a three digit number you know
one zero one
where instead of knowing what each of
the digits was
a one or a zero or a one you know some
quantum probability distribution that
sounds like a lot less information
and it is but it turns out that for
certain types of calculations
you don't need to know the value of each
of those bits
it's good enough to know the probability
distribution
this quantum superposition and you can
do some types of calculations more
quickly
so right now people are only just barely
working on these quantum i mean they're
working hard
i said it wrong but you know it's hard
to keep these things cold and
isolated from the environment because as
soon as you have some photon
that interacts with it you have what's
called quantum decoherence and
you no longer have this superposition so
there are big technical challenges but
one of the great things about homo
sapiens is that we embrace technical
challenges
we go for it we climb the mountain
because it's there first because it's
interesting but secondly
because it ends up having unanticipated
spin-offs
and these quantum computers in 50 years
may be the the main way of computing at
least
certain types of problems right so you
never know
what the practical spin-offs will be of
these
wild-eyed crazy-haired theories that uh
that you know people that are incredibly
creative
um and intelligent think of you know
i think there's even even more to it
than that
one thing that so when i originally
started making youtube videos it was
like all right look i know what my brand
is going to be it's all around
empowerment i want to help people manage
sort of their mental state
because that had changed my life so
extraordinarily when i got a grip on my
own mind and saw that i was able to take
myself so much farther
and then i was like i for my own sanity
i have to start branching out beyond
that
and in trying to explain to my team why
i felt it was so important
it was you you get empowered
so that you can do something and you
don't just get empowered to sit around
empowered it's like
just like skills have utility you want
to go put that utility to use
and getting people to you
i study weird things that i never know
how they're going to
come to use in my life but they'll come
to me as an
analogy that makes something else make
sense they'll allow me to connect dots
that i otherwise wouldn't have been able
to connect
and so you know you're unless you're
you just want to be a follower you
absolutely must encounter novel ideas
outside of your
your realm of influence and part of the
reason that i think i've been
as successful as i have been is that
every 10 years almost by accident i've
had to completely reinvent myself
and so i started out in film then i went
to technology then i went to nutrition
and now i'm back in media but media in a
way that
has changed in the intervening 20 years
so radically
as to be almost unrecognizable from
where i started
and i heard this quote it literally to
this day haunts me and is why i asked
you that earlier question about staying
sort of mentally supple
is genius is a young man's game and i
was just like
oh god as somebody who's a late bloomer
i do not like that idea whatsoever the
fact that most people get
the nobel prize in their 60s for work
they did in their 20s like
i'm just i'm not okay with that and when
you look and i forget who said this you
might know
there was a guy i think he's won two
nobel prizes
could be wrong about that but he said it
was because he
had uh i think chemistry and
maybe physics and he was like it's the
area of overlap
that i have these two gigantic worlds
and
where they collide i'm able to make
novel insights that i wouldn't otherwise
be able to make
and so that became sort of this rallying
cry in my life
of to have novel insights i've just got
to take in data that i can't yet predict
how it's going to be useful
i follow my interest it's not just sort
of blindly taking in data
but in doing that i find whoa like
things collide
that i couldn't have predicted and your
background in
chemistry feels unaccidental to me that
you would be as good
at what you do as you are does that make
sense to you
yeah you know i have this background in
chemistry from age 10 through 17 it was
sort of
all i did and at the age of 14 i got a
small telescope as a gift and
the third star i looked at turned out to
be saturn you know so
that was a great thrill no one you know
told me to look at that that would be
saturn
i discovered it on my own that night
didn't matter that millions of people
already knew about it
so that started me off on astronomy on a
steeper slope
but i always still liked chemistry and
this whole
exploration aspect of science as a whole
and now i you know i still study
explosions explosions of stars i mean i
used to study
explosions of chemical compounds and
stuff but
they're all interrelated they have
things that you can apply from one
subject area to another
and they're useful if you keep your mind
open
so i think my studies of chemistry and
being interested in science in general
were definitely helpful
but getting to another thing that you
said there you have this open mind
you've got these new ideas you're
setting a new course for yourself
as you did with you know quest nutrition
for example
but it was hard work you had to
put your butt down and work damn hard to
get there
to grapple with new ways of doing things
and stuff and as
physicists as scientists initially we
come across
these new ideas quantum entanglement and
all that and
you have to just struggle with them and
work hard on them and approach them from
different perspectives it's not going to
be easy
but you know good things are hard to do
and hard things are good to do
right you know ultimately the
satisfaction you get
will be in some proportion maybe even to
some power
of the effort and devotion you put into
something it's not going to come easily
and you know just last week
there was uh this hubble space telescope
deadline every year you apply for time
and
you know i had a bunch of proposals that
i was on and a few that i was leading
and here it is it's thursday night
they're due on friday
and you know i put in an all-nighter or
nearly an all-nighter
and then i slept a lot the next day um
it's okay once in a while to do what is
needed to be done
to continue on and i'm not saying get
perpetually too little sleep but i think
it's been shown that
if you skip a night once in a while and
just get a lot of sleep the next night
that's okay if you skip a week or two
weeks then you can't make up for it but
my point is simply that sometimes it's
going to be hard
but that's part of the reward it's the
sweat
it's the grit that you put into it and
you've done that
right you reinvent yourself every 10
years
i'll bet it doesn't come naturally if it
does more power to you
but i'm guessing that you have to put in
the sweat
sweat blood and tears to do that and
scientists need to do that too
in in all walks of life to be a leader
you got to do what it takes sometimes i
agree
and this gets in so i love your
disclaimers about sleep and i'm the same
you want to do things to make sure that
you're
around as long as possible but i'd be
lying if i said that i didn't find i
forget who the mathematician was but
there was this mathematician
and just for the record i don't do drugs
but there was a mathematician who was
notorious for doing speed
and um one of his friends came to him
and said
look man this is ridiculous you're
you're gonna end up killing yourself you
need to stop doing speed
and you're an addict he said i'm not an
addict i could stop any time the guy's
like all right fine do it stop for a
month
and so he stops for a month and at the
end of the month he
the friend says you know don't you feel
better and
you know i am impressed that you were
able to stop and he was like yeah i told
you i could stop but we've just set
mathematics back 10 years
and that idea of being so obsessed with
something
that you really give yourself to it
because i am i am
well aware as i eat very cleanly i
prioritize sleep i
my relationship with my wife is my
number one priority loving relationships
all of that like so so so important
but at the same time i'm shortening my
life because of how
fast and hard i go all the time but i
love it
and i make no apologies for it and it is
i forget the exact quote but it's like
what i want to do with my life is
help people find the thing that makes
them come alive because what the world
needs is more people who've come alive
and that like wanting other people to
come alive
in the way that you've come alive with
astronomy and the way that
it pushes you to you know pull an
all-nighter
or to um stay up all night watching to
make sure the lick of observatory didn't
burn down during the fires i mean
there's just like
i don't know man to me that's like the
beauty of it all it's that same
sense of poetry that i get when i look
into the cosmos
and just am horrified that i won't live
long enough to
see all the answers and thrilled that i
live in an age where we look up to the
stars and have some context of what
we're seeing
yeah absolutely you know jumping off
from what you said it's
yes we all want to live a long time and
that's certainly my my uh
one of my goals but uh it's the quality
of the time that you live
that's actually more important than the
duration
you know if from age 70 to 100
you're you're essentially a vegetable
okay
all right you're alive that's fine but
what quality of living are you getting
from that
you know so i'd rather
live vigorously and get more out of the
time
when i'm conscious and my heart is
beating and i'm
doing things and enjoying nature and
making discoveries
learning about other people's
discoveries i don't want to stagnate
during those waking hours
you know even if it means that
i'll have fewer waking hours but if you
eat well
exercise and rest and this is part of
the message you give in so many of your
presentations
you're likely also to to live a long
time right
so they don't have the energy to push
they're not mutually exclusive here now
you know when i was young i was kind of
a maniac
i really did get way too little sleep i
now acknowledge that it was probably bad
for me
in the long run fortunately right now
i'm still very very healthy
and um don't seem to have suffered any
clear side effects from
my maniacal youth but i i was crazy
uh as a as a student and a postdoc and
or you know assistant professor i mean i
just i worked all the time and
it's in part because i loved it i mean
it was mostly because i loved it sure i
wanted to get a job and all that but
i wasn't really worried about that
because you know
if i work hard and produce good results
the job will come with it
but it was because i loved it so much
and still do love it that i have to stop
myself some evenings
and say look alex it's time to get some
sleep
you know you can start again the next
day
but often my mind is racing with the
things that i've read
or thought about and it can be hard to
fall asleep
that's my problem actually when i get
enough sleep
it's hard for me to fall asleep at an
early enough time to then not
have to for example turn on or set an
alarm clock
and i know that you don't like to set
alarm clocks and i confess that
i can't exist that way because i
i would end up you know falling asleep
too late and then sleeping through my
morning appointments or my classes or
whatever
yeah no i definitely get that so let me
ask you if
you could either look into the future
a number of years to your uh discretion
or into the past to whatever period you
want to look to
which would you choose oh gosh i would
look toward the future
you know and i'll just first first the
future because
we do have ways of examining the past
that's one of the great things about
science you know
geologists study the strata in the grand
canyon
astronomers look at progressively more
distant galaxies and
thus they're looking back in time a time
machine by the way this is one of the
things that i try to teach my
introductory class besides we are made
of star stuff
by looking farther back in distance we
we're looking further back in time so
there are many ways of
recreating what happened and learning
not the details but you know
archaeologists they look at they look at
ancient societies and stuff so
we already know a fair amount about the
past and that's thrilling
but i really want to know about the
future
what in particular is going to happen to
humanity
are we going to be stuck on this planet
and is something going to go drastically
wrong because an unanticipated asteroid
hits us
or we're neglectful of earth
um or don't you know and don't recognize
what we're doing to it or there's some
megalomaniac who just says well i'm
going down so everyone's going down with
me you know
whatever some human-induced disaster
or some extraterrestrial disaster that
whites out life on earth is that what's
going to happen
will we be elsewhere before that happens
spreading our seed elsewhere etc
i want to know what happens to us to
humans
not just to the universe i think the
universe will expand forever but uh
you know and eventually stars will die
out but i'm deeply interested in
plants and animals and in particular
humans on earth what's gonna happen to
us
and is that a hundred years in the
future a millennium
i hope not such short time scales though
they might be
i'm hoping it's millions of years if not
tens or hundreds of millions of years so
if you
got granted access to one moment in the
future
but you had to pick a specific number of
years in the future
how many number of years would you pick
yeah that's an interesting
question um
you know a million years is a little bit
silly because
it would be almost like probably things
would be completely unrecognizable
or maybe we wouldn't even be here maybe
we'd be completely replaced by robots i
don't know
uh 10 years is way too little even 100
is a bit too little so
in round order of magnitude you know
factors of 10
i would say a thousand years would be
really interesting
in 3000 bce
uh sorry ce i was putting myself
5000 years ago but in 3000 ce
what will life be like and what will
humans be like here on earth
and will we have progressed elsewhere i
mean i'm a
i'm a big fan of space travel and
exploration
in part because we're pioneers explorers
by nature
in part because to improve our chances
of survival we really do need to put
us elsewhere and in part because it's
such a giant technological challenge and
i like challenges and
humans are good at at you know
addressing
and meeting challenges and space
exploration i think is inspiring to the
kids as well
so it helps them motivate them to go
into stem
fields you know science technology
engineering mathematics and
most of them won't become rocket
scientists but that's okay
they'll go on into fields that are more
immediately useful to society
medical physics applied physics
engineering computer science
all all these things are good reasons to
do space exploration
so how far will we have gotten in a
thousand years
you know how far do you think so barring
the sort of cataclysmic human
error of some kind uh how far do you
think we get in a thousand years
i think in a hundred years we'll be on
mars
um maybe not a gigantic colony i know
elon musk is
i think in january 2020 he said a
million people by 2050.
i don't think that's going to happen he
said one person by 2026
whoa said this only a year and a bit ago
and he said an uncrewed spacecraft by
you know i don't think those things are
going to happen but it's great to be
ambitious like elon is right
he motivates people he gets them
inspired
so what if you don't meet your timeline
at least it gets people pumped up so
his timeline is gradually being revised
we'll see what he says when
we get close to 20s 26 and there isn't a
person on mars yet
but sometime in the 2030s there might be
a person on mars
by 2100 we might have a small
colony in a dome i think it's very
difficult to terraform
mars not completely impossible but there
are
big issues but we might you know build
domes
or something so the point is have at
least some of us
somewhere else so that in case something
happens on earth bad
we are elsewhere and i'm not saying i'm
not using this as an
excuse some people are sometimes
critical of this line of reasoning that
oh you're using this
as an excuse not to take good care of
earth
no i want to take good care of earth the
best that we possibly can
but we hedge our bets right by placing
some eggs in a different basket folks
things could go wrong no matter how well
we
think we're looking after earth um
you know so it just makes sense to put
us elsewhere and of course we want to
respect any indigenous life that is
elsewhere but i think the odds of
mars having anything beyond bacteria are
remote
and even the bacteria are not a high
probability
in my opinion so i think that will be
you know
land that we're not taking from anyone
or anything
so why not basically spread
homo sapiens yeah i'm i am aggressively
on board with that and i think that
you know one thing people maybe aren't
thinking through is
that when people started going west it's
not like the cities crumbled and nobody
cared about them the vast majority of
humanity is going to stay here
and even if all the people that left
didn't care which of course i think they
would i think they would
care maybe more like there's something
about
it still being the homeland the people
that you love that you're leaving behind
you'd never want anything to happen to
it
but that no matter how
good beautiful a city gets people have
always
ventured into the unknown and like you
said it's so inspiring to people
um so i am wildly motivated by
space travel even though i
agree that you know it's like protect
earth first that's
you know the only logical sort of self
preserving way to think about it but
there's something about
feeling like you can go beyond and
i mean i'll use a word that people are
going to hate but you you go and
you conquer like you you put yourself at
tremendous risk i mean think about
the polynesians as they set out onto the
ocean like that's so crazy when you see
the boats
that they got in and found a way to find
these like
crazy tiny islands and the sort of awe
that i think about those journeys i
think about
a space journey it's so exciting to me
oh yeah and you know
how many failed polynesian expeditions
were there where they didn't come across
hawaii or one of the south sea islands
or whatever yeah
but they were explorers right
and i i feel the same way it's going to
be hard though and there's going to be
some failures
but we are i'll be your explorers you
know
do you think we'll have the stomach for
that when the first uh
people on mars end up dying on mars
will we have the stomach to send more
people oh i think so
um you know the government has to be
very very careful
because if someone dies it's a big pr
disaster and all that in the private
enterprise
it's not that way you get people who
want to go
who understand the risks um there isn't
the government responsibility and that
you're using taxpayer dollars and oh you
know
suddenly a teacher died like in the
challenger disaster that was
that was horrible i mean it was a you
know it was just
a tremendous loss um
you know i understand they had reasons
for wanting her to go
but but you know she wasn't a trained
astronaut
who had agreed that these are the risks
that
that profession is gonna entail you know
i'm sure she understood that uh
it was a dangerous mission but there
hadn't been a failure up to then
so we were pretty good and so maybe we
even became a little bit complacent
right about
what our success rate will be but that
was a dangerous thing right and it was a
publicly
funded thing it was nasa but in the
private domain
i think it's a different story first you
can do things cheaper
and faster secondly you can recruit
people
who at least initially let's say they
plan on dying there
maybe they have even a terminal disease
they don't even plan on coming back but
the thrill
of being among the first people on mars
you know
if i didn't have my family to to think
about and i do
you know i sometimes have asked this
hypothetical question
if i had a terminal disease and
if i had very little to live a year just
enough time to get to mars
would i go there you know just just
just for the thrill of the experience
and i know that my family wouldn't like
it and so i probably wouldn't wouldn't
do it but
you know just between you and me and all
the people who are going to listen to
this yeah it's a
it's something i've thought about not
that it's a possibility right now and
not that i hope i get a terminal disease
but
initially it's going to be people who
are who know that they're not going to
come back because
bringing someone back is even more
difficult than just
landing them there uh and landing them
there
is a lot more difficult than just
landing robots there because you don't
need to deal
with oxygen and waste and water and food
and
if some robots you know get destroyed in
an explosion or a failed landing well
all right so what at least it's not
human lives but as long as people
understand the risks that are
that are that they're taking yeah i
think there will be such people
and indeed i think there's there's some
mars one company or something like that
that already has a list of people that
they have who are saying yeah
we'll go on a one-way journey and we
understand the risks
do you know ernest shackleton and the
endurance
yeah have you ever read the ad that he
put in the paper to get his crew
i have i either have not read the ad or
i don't remember it please remember oh
my god
it is so good i uh i had to look it up
the other day and read it to my wife
because
i'm like you want to hear the kind of
people i want to be around
it i don't have it memorized but it goes
something like this
looking for men
who are interested in a job that will
entail
entail bitter cold low wages
extremely difficult to reign
almost certain failure unlikely to make
it home alive
but glory and something else if we're
successful and that was it
and he crewed up man people were ready
they
they were they wanted that challenge
they wanted the
shot at glory and you can say that
people are foolish for wanting it man
but there's something in the human
spirit
that there is a sub set of people who
were just like sign me up
and uh ah man i i find that really
inspiring
yeah well you know so so mars i think is
a very real possibility and there will
be people who who want to go
and a colony might get set up in some
sort of a dome with air in it
there's already practice being done
there's some place in arizona where they
basically
isolate themselves for a year or two
inside a dome biosphere i think it's
called yeah
practice living under such conditions um
you know elsewhere in our solar system
becomes more difficult although not
impossible
but ultimately given that even our sun
is gradually growing more powerful
and you know that's not the cause of the
current
climate change but ultimately it will in
a billion or two billion years
the oceans will have evaporated away um
that could be compensated by a lowering
of the carbon dioxide level by a
substantial amount but that then
makes plants angry okay if you lower the
carbon dioxide level too much so
within about one or two billion years
conditions will be
fairly unlivable here on earth now
that's a pretty long time scale
nevertheless if humans or their
evolutionary descendants live that long
we have no choice but to either either
move our planet farther away or
go to mars or whatever but even those
are temporary solutions
we've got to go to other planetary
systems and there i think it's
much much harder because you know the
nearest star
it takes light four and a quarter years
to travel it's 4.2
light years away that's 25
million million miles okay it's it's an
unfathomable number right it's that's
the close one
yeah it's the closest one right in my
you know to give you an
example of one of the analogies i use in
my class
suppose our sun which is 109
earths across so the sun is big okay
squish the sun down to a grain of sand
and then scale all other distances
by about by the same factor okay
so on a scale where stars or grains of
sand
the nearest star is about 10 miles away
okay yeah stars are grains of sand
and they're spaced 10 miles apart from
one another or 10 kilometers it doesn't
really matter
we're just order of magnitude here so
these are gigantic distances
and so though i'd like
humans homo sapiens to get to planets
that we know are orbiting other stars
and astronomers are even finding ones
that
more or less live in the region where
water might exist on the surface in
liquid form and all that
the so-called goldilocks planets let's
say we find one and we want to go there
it's not going to happen with humans
because of the length of time it takes
to get there
or the inordinate amount of energy to
get
spacecraft up to a very fast speed
it could be done with frozen embryos or
something with some future technology
maybe
but even there the embryos are frozen
but there are still
all these charged particles called
cosmic rays that will interact with them
cause cells to you know dna to mutate
and stuff and
usually mutations don't have good
consequences
so a better way than with flesh and
blood
is to send robots that could then
you know fix themselves if some charged
particle messes up part of the circuitry
and then using the raw materials on the
planet they could build
copies so our evolutionary descendants
could well be robots
and if that is very distasteful to you
i could also imagine where the robots
are there on another planet you sent
them there but then you send
human genetic code as a bunch of ones
and zeros
using a radio signal which travels at
the speed of light and the robots get
that genetic code
and then they could create humans that
would be a way of getting
blessed yeah without actually physically
sending the flesh and blood yeah it's
really interesting so whoa whoa whoa
yeah uh i could send a robot there and
then send my own genetic information
like me personally this would basically
be a clone of me yeah yeah so
you assume the robots are already there
it took a long time to get them there
okay some future generation the robots
are there
and now you say i tom want
a clone of myself on this other planet
orbiting a star you know four light
years away
you encode your whole genetic code but
you know as a bunch of ones and zeros
right
and you send that information as a radio
signal radio waves travel at the speed
of light
four and a quarter years later that
signal with your genetic code
reaches that planet the pro the robots
have been
programmed to receive so-called right
like
but the eagles thing we are programmed
to receive right
but they are programmed to receive and
they then build
a copy of you i mean that that's not
possible right now
sure but i don't see anything uh that
violates any known laws of physics
that's always my standard
does it violate any known laws of
physics
if it doesn't let's consider it if it
does well maybe there's a way to
circumvent that but that's a lot more
speculative but this is not that
crazy you know i like that idea a lot
so i'm writing a story right now about
um it's called coyotes of the air gap
and it's all about
basically a future in which people's
consciousness are uploaded into these
great clusters of servers kind of like
the matrix but imagine if you were
aware like when you died you you know
upload your consciousness
and your consciousness carries on you
have all your memories
but you know that you're a digital
entity and
if we actually get to the point and i
know that we're a long way away from it
but if we actually got to the point
where we could
upload our consciousness then that means
that i could send my consciousness
somewhere have it sort of essentially
redownloaded into
either a purely robotic body or a sort
of combination
genetics robot or genetics entirely
um created by the the robots man that's
so
interesting to me as somebody that so i
don't have kids so there's no
um i don't know if catharsis is the
right word but there's no like that
that sense of sort of denial of death
and that i have children that will carry
on my legacy
so i think a lot about how do i get my
consciousness at least
uh you know to live on so that that's
really interesting it makes me want to
write a story around that
no it's totally fascinating tom and if
you're not hell-bent on having
you know a physical copy of yourself if
that's not so important
if what's going on your in your mind is
the most important thing
then indeed uh essentially storing the
contents of the brain
as a bunch of ones and zeros it's a it's
a lot of them
okay and all that we don't even really
know what consciousness is but you'd
want to reproduce everything right
you'd want to reproduce not just
sentience but consciousness and empathy
and and feelings of of love and desire
and pain and all that not just a nervous
nerve pain but you know an emotional
pain
if you want all those things it's going
to be a lot of bits nevertheless
if what we are is a bunch of ones and
zeros and i don't know that we know the
answer that question yet but
i actually you know i think that's what
we are we're a very
interesting set of ones and zeros
nevertheless it's a ones and zeros
then yeah a way to immortality might be
to store the contents of your brain
every five minutes or every hour or
whatever
somewhere else and even beam it to
another planet
even but you know it could be in some
cloud storage
so to speak right and then if you get
run over by a truck
it gets downloaded to either a new
person
but not a person probably a you know a
computer a robot
but again if it's your if it's your mind
that you find most important and you
don't really need your body
then you're just some you know you're
just a robot there you're just a
computer
but you're having many of the same
thoughts okay
uh not all of them because of course you
you don't have the same
physical interaction as when you have
you know hug
someone or or make love or whatever
right but at least
the thinking part of you where you're
thinking your abstract thoughts and
trying to explore the world and
thinking about quantum entanglement all
that could continue and your memories of
what you did as a kid
and what you did in your career they're
all stored
in that computer and so so in that sense
you've bought yourself
immortality right i mean i i find it
depressing when i forget things because
a big part of me
is my memories and when i forget things
it's like part of me is lost and i guess
i'm not aware of it
unless someone brings up the subject
whose memory i've forgotten but
sometimes i get together with my old
grad school buddies and they'll bring up
something i'm all
oh man i had totally forgotten that we
did this or that 40 years ago
you know and here you'd have them all at
your disposal maybe it would be an
information
memory overload i don't know you know
maybe it would be a bad thing
it's interesting to think about what
what makes us human
what would humans need to put into the
robots in order to feel
that whatever we value about the human
race has lived on because even as you're
describing it's like yeah man they're
part of what makes us us is the pruning
it is the fact that our
memories are malleable right and we
wouldn't recognize a human experience
the way that
a robot or a hard drive is is literal
like
these are the ones and zeros that you've
laid down they will be those ones and
zeros every time you access them
and part of what makes humans so
interesting is the malleability of our
memory is the way
i just had a sleep doctor on of all
people who
was talking about how one of the
fundamental reasons that we sleep
is that we're taking that experience
from the day and we're sort of wiping
off
all the hard emotional resonance and
then putting the memory back as sort of
knowledge without the pain and so we
said a better way to think of it is
time doesn't heal all wounds sleep heals
all wounds
yeah to the the notion of well if you
have a hypothesis that should make
predictions
one of the predictions is that there
should be in people that have ptsd where
sleeping doesn't seem to
reduce the emotional stress you should
be able to measure that in their blood
and you can and it's the amount of
noradrenaline
should go down at night for people with
ptsd it doesn't and so it stays elevated
and so they found that if you give them
there's this heart medication drug that
has this bizarre side effect
of it lowers the noradrenaline in your
brain if you
give them that their ptsd goes away
it's really really interesting just i
bring that up in the context of
where's that line for humans you know
what i mean does it have to be meat like
you need to ship
meat my my meat suit to another planet
is it just my mind but so much um lisa
feldman barrett wrote a book called how
memories are made
or how emotions are made and she talks
about how without your body you you
literally wouldn't be able to make sense
of your world and because there's this
two-way communication between the body
and the mind anyway
so interesting to me yeah you know on
this topic
a bit of a tangent but not completely
you know you you emphasize
sleep and memories and emotions and all
that
another thing i find that really makes
my life full
and that accentuates memory memories and
the process of living and all that
is to occasionally go through
mind-blowing experiences
and i have here a shirt that my wife
wife
helped design it's of a total solar
eclipse it was
august 21st 2017. we were in oregon
but if you've never seen a totally
eclipsed sun
where the moon blocks all of it all of
the bright disk
it is a mind-altering highly moving
emotional experience that you will never
forget and that can keep you going
sometimes in in low times or whatever i
don't know tom have you ever seen one of
these phenomena
a total i saw a partial eclipse and
that was awesome well so that's awesome
but you haven't lived tom despite your
very full life
april 8 2024
the path of a total solar eclipse goes
right across the u.s
goes through mexico enters texas goes up
to the northeast
new york and into north into eastern
canada
april 8 2024 put it on your calendar
be on the path of totality you might be
at
90 95 98 eclipse but it's not the same
it's more than a night and day
experience tom you got to be within the
path
you know call me or write to me after
you've experienced it
you will be a transformed person and you
will look
back to that date and time and that
experience
throughout the remainder of your life as
one of these things
that you're glad you put on your bucket
list
and did experience and it didn't cost
very much to do so
i mean the path goes right through
dallas texas and a bunch of other
cities usually these things are in the
distant corners of the world and it's a
great way to travel by the way
if you have the time and means to do so
as my wife and i have been doing i've
done 17 of these things but this one is
going to be
really easy for americans to see april 8
2024 tom don't miss it you'll thank me
have you ever had to put words to why
it's so moving
it's difficult to put words because it's
such an
out of body out of mind experience your
jaw just drops
when the last bit of the sun gets
covered you get this thing called the
diamond ring effect
right at the beginning of totality and
right at the end
that's a magical moment then you look at
the total eclipse and you see this
corona
surrounding what looks like a black hole
in the sky and it's just hanging there
and you're all like oh it's
your mind turns to mush many people who
try to photograph it
you know if unless they have their
sequence practiced many times they'll
flop up better to have a computer
running it because you don't want to be
messing around and distracted by that
plus the photographs and even the videos
don't show the whole experience it's the
the temperature changing the light
changing very quickly the corona coming
out
the people reactions it's a very social
experience for some
others want to experience privately
whatever your thing is
the whole thing is just marvelous and
quite indescribable in work i mean i now
i know i sound like a nut you can call
me a lunatic
that's a bit of a joke right nice once
you've seen one
you will see why those of us who have
been there
talk in such nonsensical
terms about experiencing a total solar
eclipse
so i'll definitely check it out april 18
24. do you think that there are other
beings in the universe that have a
similar
um take like is there any human-like
alien out in the world out in the
universe i should say no maybe
maybe um the universe is a big place
and uh within our observable
universe there's something like ten
sorry like
something like a hundred billion
galaxies um even more if you count the
little ones
each galaxy has billions of stars ours
has more than 100 billion stars
so when you you know multiply all the
numbers together there are a lot of
stars there are a lot of planets
a lot of them are potentially habitable
the thing is though that we don't know
how
life came about and we don't know
how it evolved to intelligence at our
level
and at least on earth it was a very
unlikely process
throughout most of the history of earth
in fact it didn't happen you know
homo sapiens were around starting 250
000 years ago
early hominids four million years ago
out of the near 4 billion year history
of life on earth
there hasn't been anything like us and
moreover
intelligence and mechanical ability at
our level is not a clear
evolutionary advantage so for those
reasons and some others
i think that life as advanced as ours
is out there but not very common
and that might be a minority view but i
think i have good reasons for thinking
that
um you can't just say there are a lot of
stars out there
and surely they're teeming with life
there are a lot of factors
that lead to life and then intelligence
and mechanical ability
at our level and i think they're fairly
rare
i don't think we're unique but i think
they're pretty rare
at least in our galaxy you know yeah i
mean the fermi paradox certainly
introduces the idea of well if they are
there
where are they like why are they so
quiet right if
if they're really common then we should
have seen them in abundance
the fermi paradox does not explain
things if they're
if they exist but are not very common
then
then you can explain the very paradox so
i'm not using it
to argue completely against the
existence of other things and plus
again i think a natural evolutionary
process
does given enough time and circumstance
lead to things like us i just don't
think it's a very
common process you know yeah one
one of my favorite statements about the
universe is
uh and i unfortunately don't know who
said it but um
if you bombard a planet with photons
long enough it will emit a tesla
and uh i thought that was hilarious uh
since that is precisely what happened
here on earth
um well the monkey's typing uh on
typewriters and coming out with romeo
and juliet right
so true yeah it's uh when you were when
you were describing the solar eclipse it
just
that notion of the the wonderment of
what the universe has created
in in us you know that we are star stuff
thinking about the very nature of stars
and and
and being awed by it isn't that magical
yeah very right and to be awed by an
eclipse and by the way
other planets in our own solar system
don't have
moons that have the right size and
distance from the planet
to give you as nice and an eclipse as
what we have so
you know we're privileged to have it
we are able with our minds to enjoy it
and appreciate it
you know whales and dolphins are pretty
intelligent
but i don't know that any experiments
ever have ever been done
to see whether they appreciate the ah
and the beauty
of something like an eclipse or even of
their
own existence right do they tangibly
understand that they exist
and the intricacies of evolution that
led to their being
we do and that's part of what makes homo
sapiens so special
right and i'm not denigrating whales and
dolphins in any way i'm just saying that
as far as we can tell our minds and the
way they work
and the emotions we have not to say that
a dog can't experience sadness it can
okay but
again we are at a level that's really
quite
extraordinary even considering the
tens of billions of other species that
have lived on earth you know
there's nothing quite like humans other
than the apes but we are descended from
the apes and
you know we're just farther along that
sequence and it's it's magical and
marvelous and each of us should do what
we can
to get the most out of this life that
we've been given
you know in our own way all right well
for people that want to take you up on
that
and get the most out of their life where
can they connect with you
yeah so my wife is just starting up a
website
called astronomy.club i will have
um you know things like celestial sites
that are coming up eclipses things like
that
you can ask me a question every once in
a while um
i'll post links to various public talks
and things that i've
given so we're just starting up we hope
to have it
running soon we will by the time this um
this uh interview appears
so you can you can reach me there and
then of course if you just google my
name or whatever your favorite search
engine is
there are a lot of public talks that
that are
on the internet and then of course there
are the great courses
it's a company that that sells these
courses i did a big introductory
course with them i'm hoping to do a
what's new in astronomy course sometime
in the next few years with them
um and then i have an introductory
astronomy textbook through cambridge
university press the cosmos
so i think we'll have links to all those
things on the astronomy.club
website and um so i hope to see some of
your followers there
uh tom and thank you for the privilege
and honor
of talking with you man thank you so
much
i really really enjoyed my time this was
a lot of fun
and guys speaking of things that are a
lot of fun if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends
be legendary take care
[Music]
you